Hi there.
This is the De La Rue.
Now it's time to look at concurrency utilities, which were introduced in Java five.
Earlier we saw threat cooperation.
We are wait and notify, but with way to notify.
There's a lot of low level handshaking going on.
For example, we had the downloader and indexer threads with this code snippet on the indexer end and
the low level communication part is emphasized in red font.
As you can see, we had to write a synchronised block.
Then we had a condition predicate.
Each HTML page is equal to null.
Then we have the weight invocation, which is followed by invoking the get HTML page method.
Now similarly on the downloader end, we once again have the synchronize block and we also had the notify
all method invocation.
Such low level communication is not only confusing but can lead to errors that may not be obvious.
In fact, we actually made one such error in our demo of Wait and Notify and let me just show you what
it was.
This is a great Notify Indexer program which we have seen earlier.
So we have the indexer thread here and the downloader thread.
Now let's assume that the downloader thread kicks in first and it enters the synchronize block here
and then it downloads the web page and assigns the downloaded content to this variable HTML page.
But let's say before it invokes the set HTML page in order to set the HTML page here.
Let's say the thread scheduler sends this thread into reasonable state and brings the other thread the
indexer thread into running state.
So here, what I want to emphasize is one thing I want to emphasize is if a thread is inside the synchronize
block like the downloaded thread, it can still be context switched, which means that it can move this
thread into vulnerable state and it can bring some other thread into running state.
That's entirely possible.
Probably.
I did not specify that in one in the earlier lectures, so just wanted to highlight that that's possible.
So here we are saying that after this statement is executed, after the HTML page is downloaded.
But before this statement where we are invoking the set HTML page before the statement is executed,
there is a context which that is happening and let's say the indexer thread will kick in and it will
invoke this get HTML page and this will return a null because the downloaded thread did not invoke the
set HTML page at this instance of time.
So HTML page would be null.
And then the downloaded thread, the indexer thread will try to enter the synchronized block, but it
does not have the lock right.
Because the lock is still with the downloaded thread and it will wait here.
Now let's say that the the downloader thread gets back into running state and then it sets the HTML
page and then it invokes the notifier all method and then it releases the lock.
And once the lock is released, the downloaded thread here, the indexer thread here acquires the lock
and it enters here.
But for it, the HTML page is still equal to null.
Right.
Because when it invoked the HTML page method, it was null.
So it goes here and it invokes the bait method and it suspends itself.
And the problem with that is, is that the notify method here, notify all method has already been invoked
by the other thread and so it will wait indefinitely over here or on unless a spurious wakeup happens,
or we terminate this thread in an explicit way.
So it's going to wait here indefinitely.
So that's the problem here.
And that was because of this coding error.
So this should have been inside inside the synchronize block.
And that's because the condition predicate is using this variable.
So it's a state variable and the condition predicate is using it.
So we need to guard it using the, using the lock of this particular object.
So that needs to happen.
So that was a coding error.
And this is all because of the low level handshaking that we are doing with wait and notify.
So that should be avoided.
So we need to make sure that we are not making any coding errors.
So that's very confusing and it's all because of the low level handshaking that we are doing with Way
to Notify.
So just wanted to highlight that and this in the resources section of the way to notify demo lecture.
So we have this program and it has already been corrected.
So this statement has been moved here.
So that's also one reason why concurrent programming is is more complicated than sequential programming.
Now, let's head back to our slides.
Here is what an item in effective Java recommends.
It recommends using concurrency utilities for threat cooperation instead of greater notify.
And these utilities were introduced in Java file.
And here are the different concurrency utilities.
They allow much simpler and implicit threat cooperation without any low level handshaking.
In the follow up lessons, we will first look at the executed framework, and it is a framework for
both threat management as well as threat cooperation.
And for this, it uses types like execute a service, callable and future.
And we are going to learn about all of them.
Next we will look at synchronize hours and they allow threads to cooperate in a very simple way.
We will look at at least one synchronization.
Finally, we will look at concurrent collections and one of them is blocking cue, which also accesses
synchronization, allowing threads to cooperate.
That's about it.
And we will next look at these concurrency utilities.
Thank you.